Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
glomerular filtration and tubular function.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe glomerular filtration and the filtration barrier.
Glomerular filtration is the first step in the formation of urine,
in which a large volume of essentially protein-free fluid is filtered from the
glomerular capillaries into the tubule, across a specialised filtration barrier.
The glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries,
and the filtration occurs across the barrier separating the capillary blood from
the urinary space of Bowman's capsule.
This barrier has three layers: the fenestrated capillary endothelium,
with its pores; the glomerular basement membrane,
a meshwork of collagen and other proteins; and the epithelial podocytes,
whose interdigitating foot processes leave narrow filtration slits bridged by a
slit diaphragm.
The barrier is freely permeable to water and small solutes, which are filtered,
but restricts the passage of larger molecules and, importantly, of plasma proteins,
both by size and by charge — the barrier bearing fixed negative charges that repel
the negatively-charged plasma proteins such as albumin.
So the filtrate is essentially protein-free, an ultrafiltrate of plasma.
Damage to the barrier, as in glomerular disease,
allows protein to leak — proteinuria.
So glomerular filtration produces a protein-free ultrafiltrate across a
three-layered barrier — the fenestrated endothelium, the basement membrane,
and the podocytes with their slit diaphragms — freely permeable to water and small
solutes but restricting larger molecules and proteins by size and by charge;
its damage causing proteinuria, the basis of the formation of urine.
Describe the determinants of the glomerular filtration rate.
The glomerular filtration rate is the volume of filtrate formed by all the
glomeruli per unit time, normally around a hundred and twenty millilitres a minute,
and it is determined by the same Starling forces that govern fluid movement across
any capillary, applied to the glomerulus.
The filtration is driven by the net filtration pressure,
which is the balance of the hydrostatic and oncotic pressures across the glomerular
capillary.
The glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure,
kept high — around sixty millimetres of mercury — by the arrangement of the two
arterioles, favours filtration.
Opposing it are the hydrostatic pressure within Bowman's capsule,
and the oncotic pressure of the plasma proteins in the glomerular capillary, which,
as protein-free fluid is filtered off, rises along the capillary.
The net filtration pressure is the glomerular hydrostatic pressure minus the sum of
the capsular hydrostatic pressure and the glomerular oncotic pressure.
The filtration rate is this net pressure times the filtration coefficient,
which reflects the permeability and the large surface area of the barrier.
So the glomerular filtration rate is governed by the Starling forces:
driven by the high glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure and opposed by the
capsular hydrostatic pressure and the rising plasma oncotic pressure,
the net filtration pressure times the filtration coefficient giving the rate — the
determinants whose alteration changes the filtration,
and the basis of its regulation.
How is the glomerular filtration rate measured, using the concept of clearance?
The glomerular filtration rate is measured using the concept of renal clearance,
applied to a substance that is filtered but neither reabsorbed nor secreted,
so that its clearance equals the filtration rate,
and this is a fundamental method in renal physiology.
The clearance of a substance is the volume of plasma that is completely cleared of
that substance per unit time, calculated as the rate of its excretion in the urine
— the urine concentration times the urine flow rate — divided by its plasma
concentration.
Now, if a substance is freely filtered at the glomerulus but is neither reabsorbed
nor secreted by the tubule, then all of it that appears in the urine must have been
filtered, so its clearance equals the glomerular filtration rate.
The ideal such marker is inulin, a plant polysaccharide that is freely filtered and
inert in the tubule; its clearance gives the true filtration rate.
In clinical practice, the clearance of creatinine,
an endogenous substance produced by muscle, is used as a convenient approximation,
though it slightly overestimates the rate because a little is secreted;
and the plasma creatinine alone is used as an inverse index of the filtration rate.
So the glomerular filtration rate is measured as the clearance of a substance that
is filtered but not reabsorbed or secreted — ideally inulin,
whose clearance equals the filtration rate;
clinically estimated by the creatinine clearance,
or inversely by the plasma creatinine — the clearance principle being central to
assessing renal function.
Give an overview of tubular reabsorption and secretion.
Having formed a large volume of filtrate,
the tubule then processes it by reabsorption and secretion,
so that the final urine differs greatly from the filtrate,
and the great majority of the filtered load is reclaimed — the essence of the
tubule's function.
The scale is striking: of the some hundred and eighty litres filtered per day,
more than ninety-nine per cent of the water and most of the solute are reabsorbed,
so that only a litre or two of urine is formed.
Reabsorption is the movement of water and solutes from the tubular fluid back into
the peritubular blood; it may be active, requiring energy — directly or indirectly,
as for sodium, glucose and amino acids — or passive, following gradients,
as for water and urea.
Secretion is the movement of substances from the blood into the tubular fluid,
adding to what was filtered — important for the excretion of potassium,
hydrogen ions, and many drugs and toxins. The different segments of the tubule have
distinct transport functions.
The driving force for much of the reabsorption is the active transport of sodium,
which the sodium-potassium pump on the basolateral membrane maintains.
So the tubule processes the filtrate by reabsorption — reclaiming over ninety-nine
per cent of the water and most solutes, actively or passively — and by secretion,
adding substances such as potassium, hydrogen ions and drugs;
the segments having distinct functions and much of the reabsorption being driven by
the active transport of sodium, so that the final urine differs greatly from the
filtrate.
Describe the functions of the proximal tubule.
The proximal tubule is the workhorse of the nephron,
reabsorbing the bulk of the filtered load,
and it does so in an iso-osmotic fashion,
setting the pattern for the rest of the tubule.
It reabsorbs about two-thirds of the filtered water and sodium,
and a similar proportion of most other solutes,
in roughly the proportions in which they were filtered,
so that the fluid leaving it is reduced in volume but still iso-osmotic with plasma.
The driving force is the active extrusion of sodium across the basolateral membrane
by the sodium-potassium pump, which keeps the intracellular sodium low;
sodium then enters the cell from the lumen down this gradient,
coupled to the reabsorption of other solutes — glucose, amino acids,
phosphate and others by co-transport, and hydrogen ion secretion by exchange,
which drives bicarbonate reabsorption.
Water follows the reabsorbed solute osmotically, keeping the fluid iso-osmotic.
The proximal tubule also reabsorbs essentially all the filtered glucose and amino
acids, secretes organic acids and bases including many drugs,
and is the site of ammonia production.
So the proximal tubule reabsorbs about two-thirds of the filtered water and sodium
iso-osmotically, driven by the basolateral sodium-potassium pump,
with sodium entry coupled to the reabsorption of glucose,
amino acids and bicarbonate and to hydrogen ion secretion;
reclaiming essentially all the glucose and amino acids,
secreting organic acids and bases including drugs — the bulk-reabsorbing workhorse
of the nephron.
Describe the transport maximum and the renal handling of glucose,
with its titration curve.
The reabsorption of substances that are actively transported, such as glucose,
is limited by the capacity of the transporters, the transport maximum,
and the renal handling of glucose, shown by its titration curve,
is the classic illustration of this.
Glucose is freely filtered and then almost completely reabsorbed in the proximal
tubule by a sodium-coupled carrier,
so that normally no glucose appears in the urine.
But the carriers have a finite capacity — the transport maximum.
If the plasma glucose, and so the filtered load, is raised,
the titration curve is obtained by plotting the filtered,
reabsorbed and excreted glucose against the plasma concentration.
At normal plasma glucose, all the filtered glucose is reabsorbed and none excreted.
As the plasma glucose rises, the filtered load rises proportionally,
and reabsorption keeps pace until the filtered load approaches the transport
maximum; beyond the threshold, the carriers begin to saturate,
and glucose appears in the urine — glycosuria — the excretion then rising in
parallel with the filtered load.
The curve shows a rounded transition — splay — around the threshold,
owing to variation between nephrons.
So the reabsorption of glucose is limited by the transport maximum;
its titration curve shows complete reabsorption with no excretion until the
filtered load exceeds the threshold,
beyond which the carriers saturate and glucose is excreted,
the excretion rising with the filtered load,
with a splay at the threshold — the classic demonstration of a tubular transport
maximum, and the basis of the glycosuria of diabetes.
Describe the functions of the loop of Henle,
the distal tubule and the collecting duct in overview.
Beyond the proximal tubule, the loop of Henle,
the distal tubule and the collecting duct further process the fluid,
performing the fine regulation and, crucially,
the concentration and dilution of the urine.
The loop of Henle, dipping into the medulla,
is responsible for generating the medullary concentration gradient by the
countercurrent multiplier: its thick ascending limb actively reabsorbs sodium,
potassium and chloride but is impermeable to water,
so it dilutes the tubular fluid and deposits solute in the medulla;
this is the site of action of the loop diuretics.
The distal tubule continues to reabsorb sodium and chloride,
again relatively impermeable to water,
and is a site of regulated calcium reabsorption and of the action of the thiazide
diuretics; its early part includes the macula densa.
The collecting duct, passing back down through the medulla,
is the site of the final, regulated adjustment:
it reabsorbs sodium under the control of aldosterone,
secretes potassium and hydrogen ions, and, critically,
its water permeability is controlled by antidiuretic hormone,
determining the final concentration of the urine.
So the loop of Henle generates the medullary gradient by the countercurrent
multiplier and dilutes the fluid; the distal tubule reabsorbs sodium and chloride
and regulates calcium; and the collecting duct makes the final regulated
adjustments of sodium, potassium, acid and — under antidiuretic hormone — water,
determining the urine concentration — the segments of fine regulation and of urine
concentration.
Pull it together: how do filtration and tubular processing combine to form urine?
I would draw it together around the formation of urine as a two-stage process:
the filtration of a large volume of plasma,
followed by the selective processing of that filtrate by the tubule,
so that the body retains what it needs and excretes what it must.
Filtration, at the glomerulus, produces a large volume — some hundred and eighty
litres a day — of protein-free ultrafiltrate,
driven by the Starling forces across the filtration barrier,
the rate determined by the glomerular hydrostatic pressure and opposed by the
capsular and oncotic pressures.
The tubule then processes this filtrate:
the proximal tubule reabsorbs the bulk — two-thirds — iso-osmotically,
reclaiming essentially all the glucose and amino acids;
the loop of Henle generates the medullary gradient and dilutes the fluid;
and the distal tubule and collecting duct make the final,
regulated adjustments of sodium, potassium, acid and water, under hormonal control,
determining the final composition and concentration.
The clearance principle allows the filtration and the handling of any substance to
be quantified.
So urine is formed by the filtration of a large protein-free ultrafiltrate governed
by the Starling forces, followed by the tubular reabsorption of over ninety-nine
per cent of it and the secretion of wastes — the proximal tubule reabsorbing the
bulk, and the distal nephron performing the fine,
regulated adjustments — a two-stage process that precisely regulates the body
fluids.
Explain how the renal handling of a substance can be deduced from its clearance.
The clearance of a substance, compared with the clearance of a marker of
filtration, reveals whether that substance is reabsorbed or secreted by the tubule,
a powerful application of the clearance concept that allows the renal handling of
any substance to be characterised.
The reasoning rests on comparing a substance's clearance with the glomerular
filtration rate, measured as the clearance of inulin, which is purely filtered.
If a substance's clearance equals the inulin clearance,
it is filtered and neither reabsorbed nor secreted, like inulin.
If its clearance is less than the filtration rate,
then less of it appears in the urine than was filtered,
so some of the filtered substance must have been reabsorbed — net reabsorption;
the lower the clearance, the greater the reabsorption,
with substances almost completely reabsorbed, like glucose,
having a clearance near zero.
If its clearance is greater than the filtration rate,
then more appears in the urine than was filtered,
so the tubule must have added to it by secretion — net secretion;
para-aminohippuric acid, almost completely cleared,
has a clearance approaching the renal plasma flow, far above the filtration rate.
So comparing a substance's clearance with the glomerular filtration rate reveals
its handling: a clearance equal to the filtration rate indicates pure filtration;
less than it, net reabsorption; greater than it,
net secretion — the clearance ratio characterising the renal handling of any
substance, a fundamental tool of renal physiology.
Describe the clinical assessment of the glomerular filtration rate.
In clinical practice, the glomerular filtration rate is the best overall measure of
renal function, but the ideal method — the inulin clearance — is impractical,
so several approximations are used, each with limitations worth understanding.
The plasma creatinine is the simplest measure:
creatinine is produced at a fairly constant rate by muscle and excreted chiefly by
filtration, so its plasma concentration is inversely related to the filtration
rate, rising as the rate falls.
But it is an imperfect marker: the relationship is not linear,
so a large fall in filtration may occur before the creatinine rises much;
and the creatinine production depends on muscle mass,
so it is lower in the elderly, the small and the wasted,
in whom a normal creatinine may mask a reduced filtration.
The creatinine clearance, from a timed urine collection,
estimates the filtration rate more directly,
though it slightly overestimates it because some creatinine is secreted.
Estimating equations — the estimated glomerular filtration rate — derive an
estimate from the plasma creatinine adjusted for age, sex and other factors.
Cystatin C is an alternative marker, less dependent on muscle mass.
So the glomerular filtration rate is assessed clinically by the plasma creatinine —
simple but non-linear and dependent on muscle mass — by the creatinine clearance,
by estimating equations giving the estimated filtration rate, and by cystatin C;
approximations to the filtration rate whose limitations must be understood,
particularly the masking of a low rate by a normal creatinine in the elderly.
Describe the phenomenon of glomerulotubular balance.
Glomerulotubular balance is the phenomenon by which the proximal tubule adjusts its
reabsorption to match changes in the filtered load,
reabsorbing a constant fraction of whatever is filtered,
and it is an important mechanism stabilising the renal handling of sodium and water
against fluctuations in the filtration rate.
Without such a mechanism, a rise in the glomerular filtration rate would deliver
much more sodium and water to the tubule, and if reabsorption did not change,
a correspondingly large amount would be lost in the urine — a small change in
filtration causing a large change in excretion.
Glomerulotubular balance prevents this:
the proximal tubule reabsorbs a roughly constant fraction — about two-thirds — of
the filtered sodium and water, regardless of the absolute filtered load,
so that if the filtration rate rises, the reabsorption rises in proportion,
and the fraction reaching the distal nephron is held relatively constant.
The mechanism involves the peritubular physical forces — a rise in filtration
raising the filtration fraction and so the peritubular oncotic pressure,
favouring reabsorption — and the load-dependence of the tubular transport of
solutes such as glucose.
So glomerulotubular balance is the matching of proximal reabsorption to the
filtered load, the proximal tubule reabsorbing a constant fraction — about
two-thirds — of the filtered sodium and water;
mediated by the peritubular oncotic forces and the load-dependence of transport,
it stabilises the delivery to the distal nephron against changes in the filtration
rate — a mechanism preventing wide swings in excretion.
Describe the renal handling of urea.
Urea, the principal nitrogenous waste product,
is handled by the kidney in a way that is more complex than simple excretion,
because its reabsorption is partly passive and flow-dependent,
and it contributes importantly to the medullary concentration gradient.
Urea is freely filtered at the glomerulus. In the tubule, it is partly reabsorbed,
passively, following the reabsorption of water:
as water is reabsorbed and the tubular urea concentration rises,
urea diffuses back across the tubule down its concentration gradient.
The amount reabsorbed depends on the tubular flow rate: at a low flow,
as in dehydration or a low filtration rate, there is more time for reabsorption,
so more urea is reabsorbed and the plasma urea rises — which is why the plasma urea
can rise out of proportion to the creatinine in dehydration and pre-renal states.
Importantly, urea also contributes to the medullary concentration gradient:
under antidiuretic hormone, the inner medullary collecting duct becomes permeable
to urea, which is reabsorbed into the medullary interstitium,
adding to its osmolality and aiding the concentration of the urine — urea recycling.
So urea is filtered and partly reabsorbed passively, following water,
in a flow-dependent way — more being reabsorbed at low flow,
raising the plasma urea in dehydration — and it contributes to the medullary
osmotic gradient through its antidiuretic-hormone-dependent reabsorption in the
inner medulla; a handling more complex than simple excretion,
relevant to the interpretation of the plasma urea.
Describe the handling of sodium along the nephron.
Sodium is the most important solute handled by the kidney,
since it determines the extracellular fluid volume,
and its reabsorption along the nephron, segment by segment,
is the central business of the tubule and the target of the diuretics,
so its quantitative handling is worth setting out.
Of the sodium filtered, the great majority is reabsorbed,
with only a tiny fraction — normally less than one per cent — excreted,
this final fraction being the regulated part.
The proximal tubule reabsorbs the bulk, about two-thirds, iso-osmotically,
driven by the sodium-potassium pump and coupled to the reabsorption of other
solutes.
The thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle reabsorbs a further fifth or so,
by the sodium-potassium-two-chloride co-transporter, without water.
The distal tubule reabsorbs a smaller amount by the sodium-chloride co-transporter.
The collecting duct reabsorbs the final few per cent through sodium channels in the
principal cells, and — crucially — this is the regulated step,
controlled by aldosterone. Each segment is the site of action of a class of
diuretic.
So sodium is filtered and almost entirely reabsorbed:
two-thirds in the proximal tubule, a fifth in the thick ascending limb,
a smaller amount in the distal tubule,
and the final regulated few per cent in the collecting duct under aldosterone — the
segments and transporters being the targets of the diuretics,
and the final fraction the regulated determinant of sodium balance and
extracellular fluid volume.
Describe the obligatory loss of water and the limits of urine concentration and
dilution.
There is a minimum volume of urine that must be excreted each day to eliminate the
body's solute load — the obligatory water loss — and there is a maximum,
set by the limits of the kidney's ability to concentrate and dilute the urine,
concepts important to water balance.
The kidney must excrete each day a certain quantity of solute — the waste products
and the excess electrolytes, the obligatory solute load.
The volume of urine in which this is excreted depends on how concentrated the urine
can be made.
The maximally concentrated human urine has an osmolality of around twelve hundred
milliosmoles per kilogram, several times that of plasma;
so the obligatory solute load must be excreted in at least a minimum volume —
around half a litre a day — the obligatory water loss,
which cannot be avoided even in maximal water conservation,
so that a person deprived of water continues to lose this minimum and becomes
dehydrated.
At the other extreme, the kidney can dilute the urine to an osmolality far below
plasma, down to around fifty milliosmoles per kilogram,
so a large water load can be excreted in a large volume of dilute urine.
So the kidney must excrete the daily solute load,
and because the maximum urine concentration is limited to around twelve hundred
milliosmoles per kilogram, there is an obligatory minimum urine volume — the
obligatory water loss of about half a litre a day;
while the ability to dilute the urine to around fifty milliosmoles allows a large
water load to be excreted — the limits of concentration and dilution defining the
range of water balance.
Describe the tubular secretion of organic acids and bases, including drugs.
The proximal tubule actively secretes a wide range of organic acids and bases,
adding them to the filtrate for excretion,
and this is a major route for the elimination of many drugs and toxins,
of considerable pharmacological importance.
The proximal tubule possesses two main families of transporters:
one for organic anions, the organic acids, and one for organic cations,
the organic bases; these are relatively non-specific,
each handling many different substances.
They actively secrete their substrates from the blood into the tubular fluid,
so that these substances are excreted not only by filtration but by this added
secretion, which can clear them efficiently from the plasma — para-aminohippuric
acid, almost completely secreted, being the extreme example used to measure plasma
flow.
Many drugs are handled by these transporters — penicillins, many diuretics,
and others by the anion system; and various organic bases by the cation system — so
the kidney efficiently excretes them.
Because the transporters are shared, drugs can compete for them,
one inhibiting the secretion of another — the basis of some drug interactions,
and exploited, for instance, by probenecid to prolong the action of penicillin.
So the proximal tubule secretes organic acids and bases by two non-specific
transporter families, adding many drugs and toxins to the filtrate for efficient
excretion; the sharing of the transporters causing competition and drug
interactions, sometimes exploited therapeutically — a major route of drug
elimination of pharmacological importance.
Describe the forces and the special features of the glomerular capillary that
favour filtration.
The glomerular capillary is specialised to filter a very large volume of fluid,
far more than an ordinary capillary,
and the particular features and forces that achieve this are worth setting out,
as they explain the magnitude of the filtration. Several features combine.
First, the hydrostatic pressure in the glomerular capillary is unusually high —
around sixty millimetres of mercury,
far higher than in a typical capillary — because of the arrangement between the
afferent and efferent arterioles, and this high pressure is maintained along the
length of the capillary; it provides a large and sustained driving force for
filtration.
Second, the filtration coefficient is very high:
the glomerular capillary wall is far more permeable to water and small solutes than
an ordinary capillary, owing to its fenestrated endothelium and specialised
barrier, and the total surface area of the glomerular capillaries is very large;
the product of permeability and area, the filtration coefficient,
is correspondingly high.
Third, the absence of protein in the filtrate means there is no opposing oncotic
pressure on the Bowman's capsule side. Opposing filtration are the capsular
hydrostatic pressure and the rising glomerular oncotic pressure.
The balance gives the large net filtration.
So the glomerular capillary filters copiously because of its unusually high and
sustained hydrostatic pressure, set by the two arterioles,
and its very high filtration coefficient,
from the permeable fenestrated barrier and the large surface area,
opposed only by the capsular pressure and the rising plasma oncotic pressure —
features that together produce the large glomerular filtration rate.
Describe the renal handling of calcium, phosphate and magnesium.
The kidney plays an important part in the regulation of the divalent ions calcium,
phosphate and magnesium, handling each by filtration and reabsorption under
hormonal control, and this is relevant to their disturbances in renal disease.
Calcium is filtered, as the unbound fraction, and most is reabsorbed:
the bulk in the proximal tubule and the thick ascending limb,
passively following sodium and water, and a final,
regulated portion in the distal tubule under the control of parathyroid hormone,
which increases distal calcium reabsorption;
so parathyroid hormone raises the plasma calcium partly by this renal action.
The loop diuretics, by abolishing the gradient in the thick ascending limb,
increase calcium excretion, whereas the thiazides reduce it.
Phosphate is filtered and largely reabsorbed in the proximal tubule by a
sodium-coupled transporter; this reabsorption is inhibited by parathyroid hormone,
which therefore promotes phosphate excretion — a phosphaturic action.
Magnesium is filtered and reabsorbed chiefly in the thick ascending limb.
In chronic kidney disease, the handling of these ions is disturbed,
contributing to the disturbances of calcium and phosphate balance and to renal bone
disease.
So the kidney regulates calcium — reabsorbed mostly passively,
with a final portion under parathyroid hormone,
increased by thiazides and lost with loop diuretics;
phosphate — reabsorbed proximally, its reabsorption inhibited by parathyroid
hormone; and magnesium — reabsorbed in the thick ascending limb;
their handling disturbed in chronic kidney disease,
contributing to disordered mineral balance and renal bone disease.
Describe the macula densa and tubuloglomerular feedback in more detail.
Tubuloglomerular feedback, mediated by the macula densa,
is the mechanism by which the composition of the fluid in the distal tubule feeds
back to regulate the filtration of the same nephron,
and a closer look at it illuminates how each nephron stabilises its own filtration.
The macula densa is the plaque of specialised cells of the early distal tubule,
at the point where it passes the glomerulus of its own nephron,
within the juxtaglomerular apparatus.
These cells sense the concentration of sodium chloride in the tubular fluid passing
them, which reflects the filtration rate and flow of that nephron:
a higher filtration rate delivers more sodium chloride to the macula densa.
When the macula densa senses an increased sodium chloride delivery — signalling
that the filtration is too high — it signals,
through locally released mediators including adenosine,
to the afferent arteriole of the same nephron, causing it to constrict;
this reduces the glomerular blood flow and pressure and so returns the filtration
rate towards normal.
A reduced sodium chloride delivery has the opposite effect,
dilating the afferent arteriole. The macula densa also influences renin release.
So tubuloglomerular feedback operates through the macula densa,
which senses the sodium chloride delivery in the early distal tubule — reflecting
the nephron's filtration rate — and adjusts the tone of its own afferent arteriole
accordingly, constricting it when delivery is high to reduce filtration;
a negative feedback by which each nephron stabilises its own filtration rate,
contributing to autoregulation and linked to the control of renin.
Describe the countercurrent exchanger — the vasa recta.
The medullary concentration gradient,
generated by the countercurrent multiplier of the loop of Henle,
would be washed out by the blood flowing through the medulla were it not for the
special arrangement of the medullary blood vessels, the vasa recta,
which act as countercurrent exchangers preserving the gradient.
The problem is that the medulla needs a blood supply,
but a blood flow through a region of high osmolality would tend to carry away the
solute and dissipate the gradient.
The vasa recta solve this by their hairpin arrangement:
the descending and ascending vessels run close together in opposite directions —
countercurrent — so that, as blood descends into the increasingly concentrated
medulla, solute diffuses in and water diffuses out, and as it ascends,
the reverse occurs, the solute diffusing back out into the interstitium and water
back in; the net effect is that solute is, in effect,
short-circuited between the ascending and descending limbs and largely retained in
the medulla, rather than being carried away.
The blood thus equilibrates with the medulla at each level but leaves without
having removed much net solute. The slow medullary blood flow further limits the
washout.
So the vasa recta act as countercurrent exchangers: their hairpin,
countercurrent arrangement allows solute and water to be exchanged between the
descending and ascending limbs, short-circuiting the solute and so preserving the
medullary concentration gradient against washout,
aided by the slow medullary flow — a passive exchange that maintains the gradient
generated by the loop, permitting urine concentration.
Describe the assessment of proteinuria and its significance.
The appearance of protein in the urine — proteinuria — is an important sign of
renal disease, particularly of glomerular disease,
and its assessment and significance follow from the normal function of the
filtration barrier, which we have discussed.
Normally, the glomerular filtration barrier restricts the passage of plasma
proteins, by size and by charge, so that only a tiny amount of protein is filtered,
most of which is reabsorbed, and the urine contains very little protein.
Proteinuria therefore indicates a disturbance of this barrier or of the tubular
handling.
Glomerular proteinuria, the most significant,
results from damage to the filtration barrier that allows plasma proteins,
especially albumin, to leak through; it can be heavy, as in the nephrotic syndrome,
and small amounts — microalbuminuria — are an early sign of glomerular damage,
notably in diabetes.
Tubular proteinuria results from a failure to reabsorb the normally filtered small
proteins. Overflow proteinuria results from an excess of a filterable protein in
the plasma.
Proteinuria is assessed by dipstick screening,
by quantifying the protein or albumin relative to creatinine in the urine,
and by formal collection. It is significant both as a marker of renal disease and
as an independent predictor of its progression and of cardiovascular risk.
So proteinuria indicates a disturbance of the filtration barrier or tubular
handling: glomerular proteinuria from barrier damage allowing albumin to leak —
heavy in the nephrotic syndrome, and, as microalbuminuria,
an early sign of diabetic damage; tubular and overflow proteinuria from other
causes; assessed by dipstick and protein-to-creatinine ratios — a key marker of
renal disease and a predictor of its progression and of cardiovascular risk.
Describe the nephrotic and nephritic syndromes in outline.
The nephrotic and nephritic syndromes are two contrasting patterns of glomerular
disease, and distinguishing them is a useful clinical framework that follows from
the different ways the glomerulus can be damaged.
The nephrotic syndrome results from a non-inflammatory increase in the permeability
of the glomerular filtration barrier to protein.
Its hallmark is heavy proteinuria, with the loss of large amounts of protein,
especially albumin, in the urine; this leads to a low plasma albumin, and so,
by the fall in plasma oncotic pressure, to oedema;
and to a raised plasma cholesterol and a tendency to thrombosis.
The filtration rate is often relatively preserved,
and there is little blood in the urine. The nephritic syndrome, by contrast,
results from an inflammatory process in the glomeruli — a glomerulonephritis.
Its features reflect inflammation and damage: blood in the urine, haematuria,
often with red cell casts; a variable, usually more modest, proteinuria;
a reduced glomerular filtration rate, with the retention of fluid and wastes;
hypertension; and oedema from sodium and water retention.
So the two syndromes differ in mechanism and presentation: the nephrotic syndrome,
from increased glomerular permeability, gives heavy proteinuria, hypoalbuminaemia,
oedema and thrombotic tendency; while the nephritic syndrome,
from glomerular inflammation, gives haematuria, a reduced filtration rate,
hypertension and fluid retention — contrasting patterns of glomerular disease,
a useful diagnostic framework.
Describe the endocrine functions of the kidney.
Besides its excretory and regulatory functions,
the kidney is an important endocrine organ,
producing several hormones and activating another,
and these functions are clinically important,
particularly because they are lost in chronic kidney disease.
There are three principal endocrine functions.
First, the kidney produces erythropoietin,
the hormone that stimulates the production of red cells in the bone marrow;
it is produced by cells in the renal cortex in response to hypoxia,
and it is the principal regulator of red cell production.
Its loss in chronic kidney disease causes the anaemia of renal failure,
treated with erythropoietin analogues.
Second, the kidney carries out the final activation of vitamin D:
it performs the hydroxylation that converts vitamin D to its active form,
calcitriol, which regulates calcium absorption and bone metabolism;
the loss of this in chronic kidney disease contributes to the disturbed calcium
balance and to renal bone disease.
Third, the kidney secretes renin, the enzyme initiating the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
central to the regulation of blood pressure and volume.
The kidney is also a site of metabolism of several hormones.
So the kidney has three principal endocrine functions:
the production of erythropoietin, regulating red cell production — its loss causing
renal anaemia; the activation of vitamin D,
regulating calcium and bone — its loss contributing to renal bone disease;
and the secretion of renin, central to blood-pressure regulation — endocrine
functions of clinical importance, notably lost in chronic kidney disease.
Thank you. A thorough account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Glomerular filtration produces a protein-free ultrafiltrate across a
three-layered barrier — fenestrated endothelium, basement membrane,
and podocytes with slit diaphragms — freely permeable to water and small solutes
but restricting larger molecules and proteins by size and charge (fixed negative
charges repel albumin); barrier damage causes proteinuria.
Second, GFR (~120 mL/min) is governed by glomerular Starling forces:
driven by the high glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure (~60 mmHg,
set by the two arterioles) and opposed by the capsular hydrostatic pressure and the
rising plasma oncotic pressure; net filtration pressure × the filtration
coefficient = GFR.
Third, Clearance = (urine concentration × urine flow) ÷ plasma concentration.
A substance filtered but neither reabsorbed nor secreted has a clearance equal to
GFR — ideally inulin; clinically the creatinine clearance (slight overestimate,
as some is secreted), or inversely the plasma creatinine.
Fourth, The tubule reabsorbs >99% of the ~180 L/day filtered (actively or
passively, much driven by the basolateral Na/K pump) and secretes wastes (K+, H+,
drugs).
The proximal tubule reabsorbs ~2/3 of water and sodium iso-osmotically,
reclaiming essentially all glucose and amino acids (Na-coupled),
secreting organic acids/bases; reabsorption of actively-transported solutes is
limited by a transport maximum.
Fifth, The glucose titration curve:
complete reabsorption with no excretion until the filtered load exceeds the
threshold, beyond which carriers saturate and glucose is excreted (glycosuria),
with a splay at the threshold.
The loop of Henle generates the medullary gradient (countercurrent multiplier) and
dilutes the fluid; the distal tubule and collecting duct make the final regulated
adjustments of Na+ (aldosterone), K+, H+ and — via ADH — water,
determining urine concentration.
Thank you. That concludes the station.